so imagine that you take a 19-hour very
long drive to Disney World with two kids
in the backseat and 15 minutes into this
19 hour trip the immutable laws of
nature dictates that you get the
question are we there yet
so you answer this question a hundred
more times easily in the negative but
you finally arrive you have a wonderful
wonderful wonderful trip
you drive 19 long hours back home and
when you get there the police are
waiting on you they accuse you of
committing a crime that occurred while
you were away in Florida you tell
anybody and everybody who will listen I
didn't do it I couldn't have done it I
was hanging out with Mickey and Minnie
and my kids but no one believes you
ultimately you're arrested you're tried
you're convicted and you're sentenced
and you spend 25 years in jail until
someone comes along and proves has the
evidence to prove that you actually were
in Florida when this crime was committed
so so I'm a harvard law professor and
the last several years I have worked on
winning the release of innocent people
who've been wrongfully convicted people
like Jonathan Fleming who spent 24 years
eight months in jail for a murder that
was committed in Brooklyn New York while
he was in Disney World
with his kids how do we know this
because when he was arrested among his
property in his back pocket was a
receipt time-stamped receipt that showed
that he was in Disneyworld
that receipt was put in the police file
a copy of it was put in the prosecutors
file and they never gave it to his
public defender in fact nobody even knew
it was there it just sat there for
20-some odd years my team looked through
the file and we found it did the rest of
the investigation and figured out
someone else committed the crime mr.
Fleming was in Disneyworld and he is now
released let me give you a little bit of
context so about three years ago I got a
call from the Brooklyn district attorney
he asked whether I'd be interested in
designing a program called a conviction
review unit so I said yes
conviction review unit is essentially a
unit in a prosecutor's office where
prosecutors look at their past cases to
determine whether or not they made
mistakes over the course of the first
year we found about 13 wrongful
convictions people haven't been in jail
for decades and we released all of them
it was the most in New York history the
program is still going on and they're up
to 21 releases now 21 people who spent
significant time behind bars so let me
tell you just about a couple other of
the men and women that I interacted with
in the course of this program so one
name is Roger Logan mr. Logan had been
in jail 17 years and wrote me a letter
it was a simple letter
it basically said professor Sullivan I'm
innocent I've been framed can you look
at my case at first blush the case
seemed like it was open and shut but my
research that showed that single witness
identification cases are prone to error
doesn't mean he was innocent just means
we ought to look a little bit closer at
those cases so we did and the facts were
relatively simple
I witness said she heard a shot and she
ran to the next building and and turned
around and looked him there was mr.
Logan and he was tried and convicted and
in jail for 17 semi years but it was a
single witness case so we took a look at
it
I sent some people to the scene and
there was an inconsistency and it's I
don't know how let me to put it politely
who same boat couldn't have run from
where she said she was to the other spot
right so so we knew that wasn't true
right so still didn't mean that he
didn't do it
but we knew something was something was
maybe fishy about this witness so look
through the file piece of paper in the
file had a number on it the number
indicated that this witness had a record
we went back through 20 years of non
digitized papers to figure out what this
record was about and it turned out it
turned out that eyewitness was in jail
when she said she saw what she saw man
spent 17 years behind bars the last one
is a case about two two boys Willy
Stuckey David McCallum they were
arrested at 15 and their conviction was
vacated 29 years later now this was a
case once again first blush it looked
open and shut
they had confessed but my research
showed that juvenile confessions without
a parent present are prone to error the
DNA case has proved this several times
so we took a close look looked at the
confession and it turned out there was
something in the confession that those
boys could not have known only people
who knew it were police and prosecutors
we knew what really happened someone
told them to say this we don't exactly
know who which person did but any rate
the confession was coerced we determined
we then went back and did forensics and
did a fulsome investigation and found
that two other much older different
heights different hairstyle to other
people committed the crime not these two
boys
actually went to court that day when for
the what's called a vacatur hearing
right where the conviction is thrown out
I went to court I wanted to see mr.
McCollum walk out of there so what the
court and the judge says something that
judges say all the time but this took on
a really special meaning he looked up
after the arguments and said mr.
McCallum said five beautiful words you
are free to go
can you imagine after just about 30
years you are free to go and he walked
out of that courtroom unfortunately as
co-defendant mr. Stuckey didn't get the
benefit of that you see mr. Stuckey died
in prison at thirty-four years old and
his mother sat at counsel table in his
place I'll never forget this the rest of
my life she just rocked at the table
saying I knew my baby didn't do this I
knew my baby didn't do this and her baby
didn't do this to other guys did it if
there's anything that we've learned
anything that I've learned with this
conviction integrity work is that
justice doesn't happen people make
justice happen justice is not a thing
that just you know descends from above
and makes everything right if it did mr.
Stuckey wouldn't have died in prison
just this is something that people of
goodwill make happen justice is a
decision justice is a decision we make
justice happen you know that the scary
thing is in each of these three cases I
described it would have only taken just
an extra minute an extra minute for
someone to look through the file and
find this receipt just just one more
I'll find the receipt give it to the
public defender it would have taken
someone just a minute to look at the
video confession to say that cannot be
just a minute and perhaps mr. Stuckey
would be alive today it reminds me of
one of my favorite poems and it's a
point that Benjamin Elijah Mays would
always recite and he called it God's
minute and it goes something like this I
have only just a minute only 60 seconds
in it forced upon me can't refuse it
didn't seek it didn't choose it but it's
up to me to use it I must suffer if I
lose it give a count if I abuse it just
a tiny little minute but eternity is in
it if I were to charge each and every
one of us I would want to say something
like every day every day take just one
extra minute and do some justice you
don't have to I mean some people spend
their careers in their lives
like public defenders doing justice
every day but in your professional lives
whatever you do take time out to just do
some justice make a colleague feel
better if you hear something that's
sexist don't laugh
speak up if someone is down lift them up
one extra minute each day and it would
be a great great place now I want to
show you something now above me is a
picture of David McCallum this is the
day he was released from prison after 30
years he got to hug and nice he had
never been able to touch before and I
asked him then I said what's the first
thing you want to do and he said I just
want to walk on a sidewalk without
anybody telling me where to go
wasn't bitter just wanted to walk on a
sidewalk I spoke to mr. McCallum about
two weeks ago and I went to New York and
it was on the two-year anniversary of
his release and we talked we laughed we
hugged we cried and he's doing quite
well and one of the things he said when
we met with him is that he's now has
dedicated his life and his career to
ensuring that nobody else is locked up
unjustly justice my friends is a
decision thank you very much
[Applause]
[Music]